Netherland Dwarf rabbit
Country of
origin
 Netherlands
Distribution Worldwide
Traits
Weight 1.1–2.5 pounds (0.50–
1.13 kg)
Coat Short, Fine
Lifespan 7-10 years
A Netherland Dwarf rabbit; note the
short ears, brachycephalic head and
cobby body. Ruby-eyed white colour
variety
Netherland Dwarf rabbit
The Netherland Dwarf is a breed of domestic rabbit
that originated in the Netherlands. Weighing 1.1–2.5
pounds (0.50–1.13 kg),[1][2] the Netherland Dwarf is
one of the smallest rabbit breeds. Its popularity as a pet
or show rabbit may stem from its neotenic appearance.
The Netherland Dwarf is recognised by both the
American Rabbit Breeders Association (ARBA)[1] and
the British Rabbit Council (BRC).[2] The Netherland
Dwarf is often confused with the Polish breed of
rabbit, but the latter has longer ears, a non-
brachycephalic head and less cobbiness. There are also
different groups within the breed, such as: true dwarfs,
false dwarfs and a group with a nickname "Peanuts".
True dwarfs have one allele for dwarfism out of the
two which makes it smaller than a false dwarf, true
dwarfs are the ideal Netherland dwarf. False dwarfs
have zero alleles for dwarfism out of the two which
makes them larger than usual. Peanuts have two alleles
for dwarfism, which can only happen if you breed two
true dwarfs together. This causes the rabbit to be
abnormally small and often die as in nearly all cases
they can not drink their mother's milk.
The Netherland Dwarf breed was first produced in the
Netherlands in the early 20th century. Small Polish rabbits
were bred with smaller wild rabbits;[3] after several generations
the resulting animal was a very small domestic rabbit available
in a wide variety of colours and patterns. Netherland Dwarfs
were first imported into the United Kingdom in 1948.[3] In the
1960s and 1970s the United States imported its first Netherland
Dwarf rabbits. The breed was accepted by the American Rabbit
Breeders Association in 1969 using a modification of the
British standard.[3]
Early dwarfs, even into the 1970s and 1980s, had fearful and sometimes aggressive temperaments. This
was a result of breeders selecting wild breeding animals for their size. The first dwarf rabbits behaved
more like these wild rabbits than domestic animals and were not good pets. However, through generations
of selective breeding, the modern Netherland Dwarf has become a gentle, friendly pet rabbit, though it
still can retain a more energetic disposition than larger breeds.
History
An adult Netherland Dwarf rabbit in Sable
Point colour.
11-week-old Netherland Dwarf rabbit.
(Vienna Marked Black Otter)
Young blue-eyed-white Netherland Dwarf
eating timothy hay.
The Netherland Dwarf's head and eyes are disproportionately
large with respect to its short-coupled and stout ("cobby")[4]
body. Its ears are notably short and carried high on the head
and its face is rounded and brachycephalic. These neotenic
features, a result of dwarfism, cause the Netherland Dwarf to
retain an infantile appearance even into adulthood.
The Netherland Dwarf has been bred in a wide variety of
colours including: Ruby Eyed White, Blue Eyed White,
Black, Blue, Chocolate, Lilac, Red, Siamese Sable, Siamese
Smoke, Sealpoint, Sable Point, Blue Point, Chocolate Point,
Tortoiseshell, Agouti, Red Agouti, Opal, Cinnamon, Lynx,
Chinchilla, Squirrel, Tan, Marten Sable, Marten Smoke,
Black Otter, Blue Otter, Chocolate Otter, Lilac Otter, Fox,
Orange, Fawn, Hotot, Himalayan, Harlequin, Magpie,
Broken, Butterfly and Mantle EMD.
Due to their size and overall disposition, Netherlands Dwarfs
often do not make good pets for children although suitability
will vary between individual rabbits. Small children, who
may play with or pick up the rabbit to cuddle it, are generally
not suited to the animal; dwarf rabbits do not like to be picked
up or held tightly, and may bite, scratch or struggle wildly if
the child does so. This often leads to accidents if the child
drops them out of fright, which can then lead to injuries due
to the fragile nature of rabbit bones. Larger breeds of rabbits
are instead recommended for children, because they have
fewer issues with temperament. However, it's possible for
dwarf rabbits to learn to enjoy being held and cuddled, if
properly trained as a baby with patience and care.
Dwarf rabbits can make excellent pets for adults. They thrive
in a quiet, stable environment with plenty of human
interaction. They are trainable, quiet and clean. Grooming
needs are minimal, but rabbits will typically enjoy a daily
brushing. Time is needed to bond with the rabbit and to build
trust, because dwarf breeds are often more nervous and more
aloof than larger breeds. However, when the rabbit has
bonded with their owner, they make affectionate pets.
Appearance
As pets
1½ year old red-eyed-white (REW)
Netherland Dwarf.
A 7 year old Netherland Dwarf.
A grey Netherland Dwarf rabbit, 2 years
old
The expected lifespan of domesticated Netherland Dwarfs is
7–10 years.[5]
Netherland Dwarf rabbits can be litter-trained, as they have a
natural tendency to choose the same spot for their droppings,
and a much higher intelligence than most rabbits,[6] making it
easier to litter train them.
Netherland Dwarfs can be skittish, wild and/or of a
disagreeable nature. This is a leftover stereotype from the
beginnings of the breed. This has changed through selective
breeding; however, they are skittish and aloof. They are
extremely active and energetic, requiring the same amount of
exercise as other breeds of rabbit. They also have a higher
tendency towards nervousness and stress. As with any
species, disposition will vary from individual to individual.
The diet of a Netherlands Dwarf consists of an unlimited
supply of hay, vegetables and good quality pellets. Root
vegetables and fruit, which are high in sugar, are not
considered suitable for forming a major part of the rabbit's
diet, and should be given sparingly in small quantities.
Pellets should be fed in proportion to the adult rabbit's body
weight, with 1/8 cup per pound of body weight
recommended; juvenile rabbits, in contrast, are recommended
to be fed an unlimited quantity of pellets. Vegetables, in
particular dark, leafy greens, are also recommended in
proportion to the rabbit's body weight, at 2 cups or more per 6
pounds of body weight.[7] Alfalfa pellets are recommended
for juvenile animals, with pellets gradually replaced with
other hays and pellets as the rabbit ages, and food curtailed in
proportion to the rabbit's weight.[8]
Rabbit breeds derived from breeding larger rabbits with the
Netherland Dwarf (or any rabbit with a dwarf gene) are
known as dwarf breeds. Most smaller breeds, like the Mini Rex, the Jersey Wooly, and the Holland Lop,
are results of such breedings. Generally dwarf breeds are slightly larger than the typical Netherland
Behaviour
Diet
Dwarf breeds
A 10 years old Netherland Dwarf rabbit
yawning
A Netherland Dwarf rabbit on swing
Dwarf, not growing larger than 4–5 lb (1.8–2.3 kg). Most
have shortened faces compared to larger rabbits, and some
even preserve the rounded head, large eyes or small ears of
the Netherland Dwarf. These features make them look little.
Specifically, the Netherland Dwarf body should be round,
compact and equally broad from front to back.
Dwarf rabbits also have short legs and a large head in relation
to the body. Their foreheads are broad and they have well-
developed muzzles. Furthermore, the eyes are large and
prominent. Their ears are erect and close together, reaching
between one and three inches in length. They have to be
shorter than 2.5 in (64 mm) per ARBA rules; if not, this is a
disqualification from competition in the Netherland Dwarf
breed. Dwarf rabbits typically weigh 2–2.5 lb (0.91–1.13 kg)
according to ARBA.[9]
The dwarf gene (symbol Dw) was discovered in the United
States during the beginning of the 20th century. When two
"true dwarfs" (both buck and doe) are bred, the genetic
pattern which makes them "true dwarfs" (Dwdw) ensures that
25 percentage of their offspring will inherit the lethal genetic
combination dwdw. These offspring, often called "peanuts"
by rabbit breeders, fail to thrive and most die within 1–3 days
of birth. The reasons behind the lethal nature of the dwdw
combination is unknown, but it is believed to cause
underdeveloped digestive tracts in rabbits. The condition is
100% fatal, although if fed by hand every hour and kept
warm, it is possible for a peanut to survive for up to three
weeks, even though it will be handicapped for its entire short
life. Many ethical breeders humanely euthanise peanuts upon
finding them soon after birth. Peanuts are easily distinguished
from non-peanuts; they have extremely pinched hindquarters,
a bulbous head and their ears are often set further back than
normal (sometimes almost onto the neck).
If two true dwarfs are bred, the statistical result will be 25%
fatal 25% false, and 50% true. The actual numbers of
true/false/peanuts in a real litter varies. "False Dwarfs" tend to have longer bodies, longer/larger ears,
longer faces, and are mostly heavier than the 2.5 lb (1.1 kg) maximum weight for showing. While false
dwarfs (referred to as BUDs by breeders, meaning "big ugly doe") do not make good show rabbits, does
from a good background are vital to a breeder's programme. They have the same "good genes" as a true
dwarf and are capable mothers, possibly even having larger and more successful litters than true dwarfs.
False Dwarfs are also unable to produce peanuts. Their litters will be 50% false dwarfs and 50% true
Breeding
A 4-week-old Netherlands Dwarf rabbit.
An adult female Netherland Dwarf, Black
Self.
dwarfs if they are bred to a true dwarf buck. False dwarfs are
easily judged for quality as the traits are generally the same,
only bigger. Ear thickness/shape, fullness of hindquarter,
topline and other traits are the same.
It is common practice among Netherland Dwarf breeders to
breed a proven show quality true dwarf buck to a quality false
dwarf doe. This eliminates the chance of peanuts and yields
quality offspring. The chances of false dwarfs is higher, but
those offspring generally go toward breeding (some false
dwarf bucks have proven themselves valuable to a breeding
programme) or are sold as pets. Usually false dwarf bucks are
not kept by breeders.
Dwarf rabbit
List of rabbit breeds
1. "ARBA Recognized Breeds" (https://arba.net/recogni
zed-breeds/). American Rabbit Breeders
Association. Retrieved 21 November 2022.
2. "Breed Standards 2021-2025" (https://web.archive.o
rg/web/20230302180606/https://thebritishrabbitcoun
cil.org/Breed%20Standards%20Book%202021.pdf)
(PDF). British Rabbit Council. Archived from the
original (https://thebritishrabbitcouncil.org/Breed%20
Standards%20Book%202021.pdf) (PDF) on 2 March
2023. Retrieved 21 November 2022.
3. Official Guide Book: Raising Better Rabbits &
Cavies. Bloomington, IL: American Rabbit Breeders
Association. 2000. p. 65.
4. Baskett, Nancy K.; Newman, Jerry A., eds. (1 July 2014). 4-H Rabbit Project Leader Guide:
Introduction, Glossary, and References (https://web.archive.org/web/20180406040818/htt
p://cru.cahe.wsu.edu/CEPublications/EM075E/EM075E.pdf) (PDF) (WSU Extension Bulletin
EM075E ed.). Washington State University. pp. 19, 25. Archived from the original (http://cru.
cahe.wsu.edu/CEPublications/EM075E/EM075E.pdf) (PDF) on 6 April 2018. Retrieved
5 April 2018. "Cobby — Short and stocky, close-coupled; very compact. Stocky — Compact,
stout, and cobby."
5. "Netherland Dwarf Rabbit Health Facts by Petplan" (https://www.petplan.co.uk/pet-informati
on/rabbit/breed/netherland-dwarf/). www.petplan.co.uk. Retrieved 21 November 2022.
6. "Netherland Dwarf Rabbit" (https://www.petmd.com/rabbit/breeds/netherland-dwarf).
www.petmd.com. Retrieved 2025-07-14.
7. Proper Rabbit Maintenance Diet (https://rabbit.org/care/food-diet/) Retrieved 21 November
2022.
See also
References
A one-year-old Chestnut (Agouti)
Netherland Dwarf
8. Rabbit Food - House Rabbit Society (https://rabbit.or
g/care/food-diet/) Retrieved 21 November 2022.
9. Wegler, Monika. "The Dwarf Breeds." My Dwarf
Rabbit. Hauppauge, NY: Barron's, 2008. 26-31.
Print.
American Netherland Dwarf Rabbit Club (http://www.
andrc.com)
Dwarf Rabbits Articles (https://web.archive.org/web/
20150103223107/http://mylovelybunny.com/)
Netherland Dwarf Rabbit Breed History (https://rabbi
tbreeders.us/netherland-dwarf-rabbits)
Breeds of Rabbits Chart (https://rabbitbreeders.us/ra
bbit-breeds)
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Netherland_Dwarf_rabbit&oldid=1324540084"
External links

